MCO-1449: add runbook for MCDPivotError (#226)
openshift/runbooks: alerts/machine-config-operator/MachineConfigDaemonPivotError.md

# MCDPivotError

> ## Meaning

Reviewer: I wonder if there is a way to combine these two paragraphs into a single, concise one as they're both describing close to the same thing. Just a thought, not blocking.

Author: You mean these two paragrapths?

~~~
This alert is triggered when the Machine Config Daemon (MCD)
detects an error when trying to pivot the
operating system (OS) image to a new version
or is unable to pivot to a new version during a cluster upgrade.

This alert occurs when a node experiences
OS update or kernel change failure(s)
lasting more than 2 minutes during a cluster upgrade.
~~~

Author: Okay cut this down to 1 paragraph then.

  timeouts or Internal Server errors in the daemon or controller pods.

     ```console
    received unexpected HTTP status: 500 Internal Server Error
     ```

  - Make sure that `quay.io` and
    it's subdomains are whitelisted by your firewall and proxy.
    You can test manual pulls with `podman pull`.

    ```console
    $ podman pull quay.io/startx/couchbase:ubi8 --log-level debug
    ```
    - You should also validate that the internal
     network on the node and the external network
     are healthy and there are no blockers
     such as a firewall or switch issues.

- You can also try to force a manual upgrade to the new image
  if the pivot is stuck.

  ```console
  -delete the currentconfig(rm /etc/machine-config-daemon/currentconfig)
  -create a forcefile(touch /run/machine-config-daemon-force) to retry the OS upgrade.
  ```

  - If you want to dive deeper you can also use the
    rpm-ostree command line tool to attempt to force a pivot

    ```console
     rpm-ostree rebase --experimental ostree-unverified-registry:quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
    ```

> - If these troubleshooting steps do not fix the problem, gather
>   the following logs, which will be helpful
>   for identifying the issue.
> 
>     ```console
>     # rpm-ostree status
>     # journalctl -u ostree-finalize-staged
>     # journalctl -b -1 -u rpm-ostreed.service
>     ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If these troubleshooting steps do not fix the problem, please obtain a must-gather and an sosreport from the affected node. Please attach these files to your support case; this will be helpful for the MCO developer investigating your case.
```
```

Reviewer: An sosreport includes these logs and gives us a bigger picture, so let's ask them to do that instead

Author: I kind of disagree. I think these runbooks should be written from the perspective that the person doesn't have a subscription to Red Hat or support subs to get external help. So I feel that a runbook should be written telling the person where to find helpful logs. Rather then 'get this dataset and hope you paid  money that someone else will help you.' imo. Let me know if you disagree

Author: I think it's better to keep as is for now. As this lets customer access these logs directly on the erroring nodes in the moment.

# MCDPivotError

## Meaning

> Alerts the User when the Machine Config Daemon
> is either unable to or detecs an error when
> trying to pivot OS image to a new version.

Reviewer 2: Many of the other runbooks start with _This alert is triggered_ or similar wording
```suggestion
This alert is triggered when the Machine Config Daemon
detects an error when trying to pivot OS image to a new version
or is unable to pivot to a new version.
```

Author: I guess the customer could also manually pivot it (Not sure what the consequences of doing that outside of trying to finish an upgrade would be though...) I think the key thing to note is if the os image is updated it will do a pivot. An upgrade is just the most relevant and common example that most customers will run into.

>Alerts the user when an error is detected upon pivot.

> This triggers if the pivot errors are above zero for 2 minutes.

Reviewer 2: Do we need these two sentences? They don't seem to add anything and the sentences before and after have better detail.

Author: I agree and went ahead and removed them.

This alert occurs when a node experiences

> OS update or kernel change failure(s)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
an OS update or kernel change failure(s)
```

Author: Grammar fixed.

> lasting over 2 minutes during a cluster upgrade.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
lasting more than 2 minutes during a cluster upgrade.
```

Author: Grammar fixed.

## Impact

If the MCD is unable to update the OS and
finish pivoting then this can prevent an
OpenShift upgrade from completing.

> This can leave the cluster an a
> unstable state and further affect the operation of the cluster.

Reviewer 2: Typos
```suggestion
This can leave the cluster in an
unstable state and further affect the operation of the cluster.
```

Author: Grammar fixed.

## Diagnosis

> When a node pivots to update the OS image.
> This is done via the `rpm-ostree` service
> that logs any actions taken to the `machine-config-daemon-*` pod

Reviewer 2: Line 26 is an incomplete sentence. The following is my attempt to complete the sentence:
```suggestion
When a node pivots to update the OS image,
the `rpm-ostree` service logs any actions taken to the `machine-config-daemon-*` pod.
```
or 
```suggestion
When a node pivots to update the OS image,
the `rpm-ostree` service logs any actions performed on the `machine-config-daemon-*` pod.
```

Author: Grammar fixed.

> If the Machine Config Daemon is failing to
> update or pivot the nodes OS or Kernel
> then the first logs that should
> be checked are the `machine-config-daemon-*`
> pod logs for the cluster

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the MCD fails to
update or pivot a node's OS or kernel,
the first logs that you should
check are the `machine-config-daemon-*`
pod logs for the cluster.
```

Author: Grammar fixed.

For the following command, replace the $DAEMONPOD variable
with the name of your own machine-config-daemon-* pod name.

> To the erroring node.

Reviewer 2: > To the erroring node.

Not sure what this means.
Also I'm not sure that _erroring_ is a word. Instead of _erroring node_, maybe _node that has an error_? _node experiencing an error_

Author: It is actually a word!

https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/erroring

But I do agree it probably could be worded better

```console
oc logs -f -n openshift-machine-config-operator $DAEMONPOD -c machine-config-daemon
```
When a pivot is occuring the following will be logged.

```console
I1126 17:15:38.991090    3069 rpm-ostree.go:243] Executing rebase to quay.io/my-registry/custom-image@blah
```

> It will log it's attempt to pivot  

Author: Grammar fixed.

```console
I1126 17:15:38.991115    3069 update.go:2618] Running: rpm-ostree rebase --experimental ostree-unverified-registry:quay.io/my-registry/custom-image@blah
Pulling manifest: ostree-unverified-registry:quay.io/my-registry/custom-image@blah
```

> If it fails to update the OS it will rollback

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the MCD fails to update the OS it will rollback
```

Author: Grammar fixed.

```console
E1126 17:16:07.549890    3069 writer.go:226] Marking Degraded due to: failed to update OS to quay.io/my-registry/custom-image@blah : error running rpm-ostree rebase --experimental ostree-unverified-registry:quay.io/my-registry/custom-image@blah: error: Creating importer: Failed to invoke skopeo proxy method OpenImage: remote error: invalid reference format
: exit status 1
```

> It will then mark the node degraded

Author: Grammar fixed.

```console
2024-06-20T17:56:33.930222523Z E0620 17:56:33.930211 4168959 writer.go:135] Marking Degraded due to: failed to update OS to quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:368d9b871acb9fc29eea6a4f66e42894677594e91834958c015ed15c03ebe79e : error running rpm-ostree rebase --experimental /run/mco-machine-os-content/os-content-501945936/srv/repo:afdc646803e2d9d774fbf3429cf91de6222e45a85ceabbafe4ee78aca74c2d7b --custom-origin-url pivot://quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:368d9b871acb9fc29eea6a4f66e42894677594e91834958c015ed15c03ebe79e --custom-origin-description Managed by machine-config-operator: error: Timeout was reached
```

> The node will continue trying to pivot despite this.
> You should start by examining the main error message and the
> stated reason it gives for not being able to pivot. Common reasons a pivot
> can fail.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The node will continue trying to pivot despite the error.
You should start troubleshooting by examining the main error message and the
stated reason it gives for not being able to pivot. The following are common reasons a pivot
can fail:
```

Author: Grammar fixed.

- rpm-ostree is unable to
pull the image from quay succesfully.
- Issues with the rpm-ostree service itself such as
being unable to start, or unable to build the OsImage folder,
unable to pivot from the current configuration.
- rpm-ostree service gets stuck and client is unable to finish
transaction and gets stuck in a loop as a result.
- The ostree-finalize-staged.service
  (responsible for rolling out pending updates) is having issues.
- Networking issues on the node prevent quay from
being reachable such as an interface being

> down, a firewall blocking the connection, the proxy, etc.

Author: Grammar fixed.

## Mitigation

> - If the machine-config-daemon pod is
>   logging the following errors from rpm-ostree
>   that relate to transactions being stuck or
>   possible issues with `rpm-ostreed` such as.

Reviewer 2: This should be a complete sentence. I took some of the next lines to finish the sentence. 
```suggestion
- If the machine-config-daemon pod is
  logging the following errors from rpm-ostree,
  it is likely that rpm-ostree is stuck in a
  loop and cannot finish the transaction
  or there are issues related to the rpm-ostree service itself.
```

Author: Grammar fixed.

  ```console
   error: Transaction in progress: (null)
  ```

>   Then likely rpm-ostree is stuck in a
>   loop and cannot finish the transaction
>   or there's issues related to the service itself.
>   You should restart the `rpm-ostreed`
>   service on the node that are failing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  You should restart the `rpm-ostreed`
  service on the node that are failing.
```

Author: Grammar fixed.

  ```console
  $ oc debug node <Node-name>
  # chroot /host
  # systemctl restart rpm-ostreed
  ```

> - If you see the networking errors related to
>   timeoutes or Internal Server errors in the daemon or controller pods.
>   For example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If the machine-config-daemon pod is
  logging the following errors, it is likely due to networking errors related to
  timeouts or Internal Server errors in the daemon or controller pods.
```

Author: Grammar fixed.

     ```console
    received unexpected HTTP status: 500 Internal Server Error
     ```

  - Make sure that `quay.io` and
    it's subdomains are whitelisted by your firewall and proxy.
    You can test manual pulls with `podman pull`.

    ```console
    $ podman pull quay.io/startx/couchbase:ubi8 --log-level debug
    ```

>     - You should also validate that the internal
>      network on the node and the external network
>      as well are healthy and there are no blockers.
>      Such as a firewall or switch issues.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need _as well_ here. 
```suggestion
    - You should also validate that the internal
     network on the node and the external network
     are healthy and there are no blockers
     such as a firewall or switch issues.
```

Author: Grammar fixed.

- You can also try to force a manual upgrade to the new image.

>   If the pivot is stuck

Author: Grammar fixed.

  ```console
  -delete the currentconfig(rm /etc/machine-config-daemon/currentconfig)
  -create a forcefile(touch /run/machine-config-daemon-force) to retry the OS upgrade.
  ```

  - If you want to dive deeper you can also use the

>     rpm-ostree command line tool to try and force a pivot

Author: Grammar fixed.

    ```console
     rpm-ostree rebase --experimental ostree-unverified-registry:quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
    ```

- If all else is still failing then gathering
  the following logs will be helpful for a

>   Red Hat support engineer to identifying the issue.

Author: Hi, 

I agree and generalized it more, some customers may not have support subs
